HOUSE STRENGTH OR BHAVA BALA


Each Bhava has been assinged certain events or function.
The first house is known as Tanu ·Bhava. It represents the
body of the individual including complexion etc. The II
Bhava represents Wealth, Family etc. If a bhava is strong,
the native will enjoy the indications of the Bhava fully. If
the bhava is week, the native will not be in a position to
enjoy the significations of the bhava.
The strength of a Bhava is determined by :
(i) Bhavadhipati Bala ic the strength of the lord of
the bhava.
(ii) Bhava Digbala.
(iii) Bhava aspect strength or say Bhava Drishti Bala.
(1) Bhavadhipati Bala :
It is the strength of the bhava or the lord of the Rashi
in which Bhava Madhya falls. These have been calculated
in previous chapters.
(2) Bhava Digbala :
It is the strength obtained by the various Bhavas due
to their Bhava Madhya being in different Rashis. The entire
zodiac has been classified into four types of Rashis namely:
(a) Nara rashis (Human signs) are represented by
,Mithuna (Gemini), Kanya (Virgo), Tula (Libra),
first half of Dhanu (Sagittarius) and Kumbha
(Aquarius). If the Madhya of ascendant falls in
Nara Rashi, the I house acquire a strength of 60
shashtiamsas (one Rupa) and it gradually loses
strength@ I 0 shashtiamsas per Bhava (whether
clock wise or anticlock wise) till it is reduced
to 0 in the VII Bhava. If the Bhava Madhya of
VII is in a Nara Rashi it will have digbala as zero.
In other words:
Bhava Madhya of I house = 60 shashtiamsas
if in Nara Rashi
Bhava Madhya of II/XII = 50 -dohouse
if in Nara Rashi
Bhava Madhya of III/XI = 40 -dohouse
if in Nara Rashi
Bhava Madhya of IV/X = 30 -dohouse
if in N ara Rashi
Bhava Madhya ofV/IX = 20 -dohouse
if in Nara Rashi
Bhava Madhya ofVINIII = 10 -dohouse
if in Nara Rashi
Bhava Madhya of VII house = 0 -doif
in N ara Rash i
(b) Jalachara Rashis:- Watery or aquatic Rashis
are known as Jalachara Rashis. they are Karkata
(cancer), second half of Makar (Capricorn), and
Meena (Pices). If the Bhava Madhya of fourth
house falls in tliese Rashi, it will get 60.
shashtiamsas and in X it will get 0 shashtiamsas.
the digbala is reduced as such Rashis are away
from IV Bhava like the pr,evious example ofNara
Rash is.
(c) Chatushpada Rashis or Quadruped Rashis:-
These are Mesha (Aries), Vrishabha (Taurus),
Sinha (Leo), second half of Dhanu· (Sagittarius)
and 1st half of Makar (Capricorn). If the Xth
Bhava Madhya falls in these it will get 60
shashtiamsas. The strength is reduced as it goes
away from Xth Bhava reaches near to IV Bhava.
(d) Keeta Rashis or insect sign :- There is only
one Rashi namely Vrischika (Scorpio) which is
Keeta Rashi. When it is in the VII Bhava
Madhya, the VII bhava acquires a strength of60
shashtiamsas and if I Bhava Madhya falls in it,
the I Bhava will have zero digbala. The digbalas
of the Bhavas whose Bhava Madhya falls in Keeta
Rash is goes on increasing by I 0 shashtiamsas per
house as it is away from I house.
(3) Bhava Drishtibala or Bhava's Aspect strength:
A Bhava gets certain strength by the aspect of the
planets on its Bhava Madhya. The Drishti Bala on the
various Bhavas is measured as was done for the Drishti
Bala of the Planets in chapter VII with the following
changes:-
(a) Mercury is always benefic for Bhava Drishti Bala
Irrespective of its association.
(b) The Drishti BaJa's of Mercury and Jupiter
including special aspect are taken as obtained ·
(full). While that of other planets (including their
special aspect) are divided by 4 i.e. only one-