TEXT BOOK 

FOR 

SHADBALA (GRAHAS)
AND 
BHAVABALA 

BY 

V. P. JAIN 

S.N.Kuf:OO:r Sher Roa:J. 
Judge 

New Delhl-110003 

FOREWORD 

Shrl V. P. Jain enjoys a unique positionamongst Astrologer teachers, being an Astrologer as 
well as MA In Mathematics with Astronomy. He Is 
one of the most prominent· teachers In Delhi 
teaching Astronomy relevant to Astrology as well 
as 'Shadabala' for the last five years, to the 
Inquisitive and brilliant elite of budding Astrologerspreparing for 'Jyotlsh Praveen' and 'JyotlshVlsharad' examlnaUon:!i conducted by · Indian 
.council of Astro.loglcal Sciences (Regd.) · Madras. 
founded by Dr. 13. V. Raman. 

As oer OU( expectation, he has jUSt broughtout the first pan of Shadbala -slightly time consuming 
mathematical calc:.tlatlon for 
quantification of overall relative planetary strength.
Clear understanding of Shadbala Is necessary for 
brilliant astrological predictions. 

Predictions that a person shall earn a fortune 
after shifting to western side far away from his 
hometown: that he Is likely to lose elections to a 
lady belonging to erstwhile royal family, much before 
elections without there being any possibU!ty of 
Imagining such a candidate; that a person would 


acquire so much promlnance that security guardswould move around him, and several other similar 
predictions could be based only on properunderstanding of Shadbala strength of planets, their 
periods and inter-periods. Brlddha Yavan Jataka 
and Sarvartha ChlDtemant and other classical 
works are replet«; with many hints to make such 
brilliant predictions. Budding astrologers must 
therefore study this book to lay a solid foundation · 
to make brilliant predictions on the basis of 

Sthanbala, Dlgbala, Drugbala, Kalabala,
Cheathabala, Nalaarglkabala and appreciating value 
of and Kaathaphalaa. 

Shrl V. P. Jain has assured us that second 
part of this book with classical references and manyIllustrations shall be brought out very soon to 
provide very rich material for budding astrologersenabling them to make brilliant predictions on the 
scientlflc basis of quantification of planetarystrength which fonns the very foundation of Vedic 
and poat-vedlc astrology. 

(5. N. Kapoor) 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

I am grateful to the following for the help and 

inspiration given to me for completing the task successfully. 

(I Dr. B.V. Raman, the BEESHMA PITAMAH of 
astrological world, for I have adopted his principles 
& tables from his book on Graha and Bhava BaJa. 

(I Justice S.N. Kapoor, my teacher, who had spared 
his valuable time for writing foreword for this book. 

(I Shri M.N. Kedar, my teacher of Astrology and old 
colleague, who hal! inspired me and also for his 
continuous persuasion without which I would not have 
completed this book. 

(I All other teachers of ICAS, Delhi Chapter I who 
taught me astrology, the divine science. 

(I Shri K. Rangachari who edited the language of the 
book. 

(I Smt. Neeru Aggarwal who worked hard for 
composing and designing the book. 

V.P Jain 
305 Technology Apartments 
l.P.Extention, Delhi] I0092 


CONTENTS 

Preface 

Introduction -
Bhava Balas of Planets & 
their Significance By Dr. T.S. Wasan 

1. Shadbala -Introductory 

2. Positional Strength (Sthana bala) 4 

3. Directional (Digbala) 21 

4. Temporal Strength (Kala bala) 24 

s. Motional strength (chesta bala) 42 

6. Natural Strength (Naisargika bala) 47 

7. Aspect strength (Drik bala) 48 

8. House strength (Bhava bala) 56 

9. lshta Phala and Kashta Phala 62 
I d. Tables ( I to IX ) 65 
II Summary 71 


PREFACE 

Ttie astrological predictions are generally based on 
the pvsition of the planets in the birth chart (called Rasi 
chart or lagna chart or (D-1). The position of the planets 
in own house, exaltation sign, Mooltrikona sign, or friend's 
sign are treated as very good. On the other hand if the 
planet is debilitated, combust, in enemy's sign etc. are 
treated as bad or the planets .become weak or ineffective 
or will give unfavourable results. It is like a general check 
up of a patient by a doctor. Whenever the need arises, the 
doctor asks for X-ray and several other tests. 

In similar way this great science ofastrology provides 
many theoretical and practical,methods to find out the real 
strength ofthe bhavas. In practice the theoretical procedure 
is to judge the strength from sub-divisional charts, through 
delineation and judgement ofbhavas with reference to other 
bhavas etc. 

To find out the real strength of the planet and bhava, 
the mathematical valuation ofstrength is also described in 
the classical texts. This is six-fold analysis of the strengthof the planets. 

The author passed Jyotisha Praveena and JyotishaVisharada Examinations as a student of the astrologicalclasses are conducted by Delhi Chapter I ofIndian Council 
of Astrological Sciences. Since 1991 he is teachingAstronomy, Shadbala, Longevity and predictive astrology. 
There was a great demand from the students of a lesson 
Type book on SHAD BALAS, which may be convenient for 
the beginners to understand the subject thoroughly. 

This Part I includes the introduction and various types 


of mathematical calculations to fmd out the shadbalas of 
planets and the strength ofthe twelve bhavas. There are 
many books available on this subject, but in this book the 
author has tried to make it very simple for the beginners; 

The part II of this book will contain the practical use 
of the shadbalas and bhava balas in predictive astrology. 

Dr. T.S. Wasaon, former Chairman Bangalorechapter and presently vice president, I.C.A.S. has also, 
at our request, sent his views on the use of $hadbala. 

We hope the astrologer community, well wishers and 
especially the budding astrologers, we mean students of 
astrology would fmd this book quite handy informative and 
useful. 

Sansthan 


its direction in travel. The said planet should not be combust 
or debilitated. 

Shubha grahas, when they are Vakri (Retrograde),
they give good results. if malefics are retrograde, they 
cause grief and purposeless wandering. But according to 
Bh.avartha Ratnakara, the malefics give good results 
when they are retrograde. 

Jataka Tathva says retrograde planets have 
exaltation power. 

The effects of Planets in odd and even rasis are as 
follows. In odd rasis it makes the person courageous and 
warrior like. If it is weak in those rasis it makes the native 
cruel and dull witted. In even rasis it gives soft nature, 
fear for quarrel, love for water, flowers and clothes. lfthey 
arc weak they give contrary results to the above. 

A planet with good Divaratri BaJa is capable of 
conferring lands, vehicles etc. and the native will defeat 
his enemies. Divaratri Bala is also called as Nathonatha 
Bala. 

A planet w·hich becomes a victor in graha yuddhacan give complete happiness and kingdom that can last for 
many years. 

The c!Tccts of lord ofthe year, month, week and hora 
arc experienced in their dasha. They give happiness, wealth 
and fame. 

The lord of the month will give two fold results as 
against the lord ofthe year. The week lord gives two fold 
results when compared to the month lord. Hora lord gives 
two fold results when c'omparcd to week lords. Here hora 
means "Kala Hora" 

A planet with paksha bala destroys the enemies and 
confers diamonds. rubies, com·cyance, wife, gold, land and 
fame. 

u 


Benefics with alround strength gives good habits, 
truthful nature upright and respectful towards wise men and 
god and will be blessed with good robes and oranaments. 

Malefics with all round strength makes a person selfish, 
jealous of virtuous people, intent on promoting quarrels.
They are wicked, treacherous, dirty, ungrateful, slanderers 
and ugly. 

m 


cflo'(l'lll1 'fll: 

Shri Veetaragaya Namah 

CHAPTER 1 

SHADBALA -INTRODUCTORY 

Shadbalas consist of different types of strengths by which 
the dynanism ofplanets ·are dertermined. 'Shad' means six 
in Sanskrit. The categories of balas, and the method of 
arriving at and the necessity for finding out their strength, 
are the questions that naturally arise in our mind when 'we 
think of shadbala. 

The shadbalas are of six kinds namely :


(i) Sthana BaJa (Positional) 
(ii) Dig BaJa (Directional) 
(iii) Kala BaJa (Temporal) 
(iv) Chesta BaJa (Motional) 
(v) Naisargik BaJa (Natural) 
(vi) Drik BaJa (Aspectual). 
The references to these Balas are found in different 
classical texts like Brihat Prasara Jatak Parijata,
Saravali and Phaladipika to quote a few. While the purposes 
of calculating the strength of planets are given below, the 
actual method of their calculation is described in subsequentchapters. 


Utility of Shadbalas in Astrology :


Would a brother/friend/relative ofours who is week 
be in a position to help us in times of need? The natural 
answer would be 'No'. That relative/friend will not be in 
a position to help us (as he is weak) though he would like 
to help us by heart. Instead he would expect us to help 
him. The same idea also applies to planets. A weak planet 
will not be in a position to give the desired results but may 
even harm the native irrespective of its nature of being a 
Benefic or Malefic. Hence it is very essential to know the 
strength of planets before venturing on predictions. 

1. Benefic or Malefic results of Dasa-Antardasa of 
any planet would depend upon the relative strength 
of that planet. Normally the results of main Dasa 
Nath are spread through out the dasa period but 
mainly the results of Antar dasa arc felt during the 
Antar-dasa Nath's period. If the Dasa Nath is 
strong and Antar dasa Nath is weak, the results 
due to Dasa Nath will be predominant while that 
of Antar dasa Nath will be lesser in intensity. If 
the Antar dasa Nath is also powerful, the results 
of Antar dasa Nath would prevail. 
2. The Bhava results will also. be influenced by the 
planets which are posited in the bhava or are 
aspecting it, or the lords and Karakas of that 
Bhava according to their inherent strength. The 
stronger the planet, the better will be its results 
for that bhava. 
3. Ayurdaya too depends on the strength of planetsand relative bhavas. 
4. lshta (auspicious) phala and Kashta (inauspicious) 
phalas are obtained by considering the Uchchabala 
and Chcsta-Bala of the various planets. By the 
2 


calculation of these Ishta and Kashta we 
know whether a particular planet will give more 
happiness or trouble in general. 

It can therefore be seen that the shadbalas of planets,
Ishtaphala and Kashtaphala, play an important role while 
giving predictions, though most of the Astrologers do not 
use these due to the tedious and time consuming calculations 
involved. But by giving predictions without considering 
shadbala, one may lead to fallacious conclusions. Hence 
it is necessary to ascertain the strength of each planet and 
bhava before giving predictions. 

3 


CHAPTER 2 

POSITIONAL STRENGTH 

Shadbalas mean six types ofstrengths as "shad" in Sanskrit 
means, six. Each planet will occupy a sign and a house and 
due to its position or aspect by other planets it gets certain 
strength. 

These strengths are measured by the following :


(I) Positional Strength or Sthana Bala 
(2) Directional Strength or Dig Bala 
(3) Temporal strength or Kala Bala 
(4) Motional Strength or Chesta Bala 
(5) Natural Strength or Naisargik BaJa 
(6) Aspect Strength or Drik Bala 
Before proceeding to the method of calculation ofthe 
above six strengths we should have a horoscope which will 
be called the standard horoscope for this book :Date 
ofBirth : 12/13-9-1981 Saturday/Sunday 
Time ofBirth : I:30 A.M.(IST) 48 ghati 32 phala 
LMT : Jb-gm_ 52' A.M. 

Terrestrial Latitude 28° 39' (N) 

Terrestrial Longitude 77° 13' (E) 


SAPTAMSA -D/7 NA V AMSHA -D/9 

DWADASAMSA-D/12 TRIMSAM!)A -D/30 

Note : 

1. Units for shadbala : Shadbala are measured m 
Rupas. 
One Rupa = 60 Shashtiamsas 

2. The two shadowy planets Rahu and Ketu are 
excluded for Shadbala calculations. 
The method ofcalculating each ofthe six strengths is givenin the foUowing pages : 

9 


POSITIONAl STRENGTH i.e. Sthana BaJa : 

A planet occupies a certain sign which can be 

i) Exaltation sign 
ii) own or Mooltrikona sign 
iii) a friend's sign 
.iv)' a Neutral's sign 
v) an enemy's stgn or 
vi) Debilitation sign 
These positions are giving certain strength or weakness to 
a planet. The strength gained due to position in a particular 
place including a sign is known as positional strength I 
sthana BaJa. It consists of five types of balas namely : 

(a) Uchchabala 
Saptavargiya bala 
(c) Yugma Yugma BaJa i.e. Ojayugmarasyamsa BaJa 
(d) Kendra BaJa 
(e) Drekkana BaJa . 
.. (a) UchchaBala : 
This strength is maximum when the planet is at its deep 
exaltation point and is assigned sixty shashtiamsas. When 
.it is at its debilitation point, its strength is minimum say, a 
value ofzero shashtiamsa. There is gradual increase from 
debilitation point to exaltation point and decrease from 
exaltation point to debilitation point. The distance between 
exaltation point and debilitation point is 180" on either side 
of the zodiac. 
This implies that the Uchchabala of a planet is due 
to its distance from the debilitation' point and it gains sixty 
shastiamsas in 180". If x" is its distance from debilitation 

.1 0 


Saptavargiya ·BaJa :-The strength of a planet 'due, 
to its position in the seven vargas is known as 
SBJ?tavargiyabala. If aPlanet is in 

(i) Mooltrikona sign = 45 Shashtiamsa 
(In rashi chart only) 
(il) Own sign (Sva Rashi) = 30 Shashtiamsa 
(iii) Fast friends sign = 22.5 Shashtiamsa 
(Adhi Mitra Rashi) 
(iv) Friend's Sign = 15 Shashtiamsa 
(Mitra Rashi) 
(v) Neutrals' sign = 7.5 Shashtiamsa 
(Sarna Rashi) 
(vi) Enemy's Sign = 3.75 Shashtiamsa 
(Shatru Rashi) 
(vii) Bitter Enemy's sign = 1.875 Shashtiamsa . 
(Adhi Shatru Rashi) 
The Saptavarga charts have been given earlier. 
Sun is in Mooltrikona in Rashi chart = 45 Shashtiamsa, 
Sun in Moon's bora which is Neutral as per Panchadhamatri 
chakra = 7.5 

Sun· in Mars's Rashi in Dreshkon Chart a FF = 22.5 
Sun in Moon's Rashi a Neutral (in Saptamsa) -= 75 etc. 
This (as given on the next page) is the way to fill the chart 

and get Saptavarga BaJa. 

15 


Exercise-1 

Horoscope: POB = Delhi 
DOB = 1Oth June, 1933 TOB = 9hJ1' AM• 

Asc. 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Satum(R) 
Rahu 
Sun 
Mercury 
Venus 
Ketu 

= 15"29' in Cancer 
= 23°44' in Leo 
= '21°43' in Leo 
= 23°32 in Sagittarius 
= 23°17' in Capricorn 
= 8°32' in Aquarius 
= 25°53' in Taurus 
= 10°10' in Gemini 
= 9°3' in Gemini 
= 8°32' in Leo. 

1. Find out the Uchchabala, Kendra Bala and Dreshkon 
Bala of the above horoscope. 
2. Describe Saptavarigya and Yugmayugma bala of 
the horosocope stated above. 
3. Compute the total Sthanbala. 
20 


When these planets are at Bhava Madhya at their 
powerful house, they will get 60 shashtiamsa as directional 
strength. 

Their directional strength will be zero, when they will 
be at the Bhava Madhya at their powerless point as theywill lose all directional power. 

The directional strength increases uniformly from 
powerless point to the Powerful point from zero to sixty 
shashtiamsa and decreases uniformly from powerful point 
to powerless point from sixty to zero shashtiamsa. The 
difference between the longitudes of powerful and 
powerless point equal to hundred and eighty degrees hence 
in one degree it gains or loses 

60 / 180 = 1/3 shashtiamsa. 

When the diherence oflongitudes of a planet from that of 
its powerless point is divided by three it gives the directional 
strength ofthe planet. The difference between the longitudes 
of the planet and powerless point should not be more than 
one hundred and eighty degrees. In case the difference 
exceeds one hundred and eighty degrees deduct the 
longitudes of the planet from powerless point. 

CALCULATION OF DIGBALA OF THE PLANETS 
OF THE STANDARD HOROSCOPE :


The Bhava Madhya of the four Kendra Bhavas are as 
follows (in decimals) :


86.43 IV 166.15 

VII 266.43 X 346.15 

22 


CHAPTER 4 

KALA BALA -TEMPORAL 
STRENGTH 

The temporal strength is the strength ofplanets due to time 
and it is found out by considering the year, month, day of 
the week, Hora of the day etc. at the time of birth of the 
native. 

It consists of the following Nine Balas :


(a) Nathonnath BaJa (b) Paksha BaJa 
(c) Tribhaga Bala (d) Abda BaJa 
(e) Masa BaJa (f) Vara BaJa 
(g) Hora BaJa (h) Ayana BaJa 
(i) Yuddha BaJa 
(a) Nathonnath Bala : 

Certain planets are strong at mid-night and powerless 
at mid-day while certain others are powerless at mid-night 
and powerful at mid-day. This strength is known as 
Nathonnath Bala or Divaratri Bala and measured after 
taking into account whether the native's birth took placeduring day-time or night-time. Sun, Jupiter and Venus are 
powerful at mid-day and powerless at mid-night. While 
Moon, Mars and Saturn are powerful at mid-night and 


powerless at mid-day. Mercury is considered as powerful 
always whether it may be day or night. 

HOW TO CALCULATE THE STRENGTH : 

The method is as under :


Mid-night means local mid-night ·and by mid-dayrepresents local mid-day. 

Sun, Jupiter and Venus will get sixty Shashtiamsha at 
local Twelve Noon. Their strength goes on decreasing till, 
at local mid-night, reduced to .zero. In the case of Moon,
Mars and Saturn it is reversed i.e. they will have sixty 
shashtiamsa at Local mid-night and zero at local mid-noon. 

For finding out mid-day = Add half the din-man 
(duration of day) in the time of sunrise. In the case of 
standard horoscope sunrise is 6h 5'" (1ST) and sunset is 
18b 28'" 

Din -man= 18h 29'"-611 5'" = 12b 2410 
• 

Half of Din-man = 12b 24'" 7 2 = 6h 12'". 

Mid-day= 6h 5'" + 6h 1210 = 12h 17'" (1ST) 

17111

Mid-night = I2h 17'" + 1211 = 24h 17'" = 011 (1ST) 

Step I -Find out the difference of time of birth of the 
native and that of local mid-night and convert into minutes 
(it should not exceed 12 hours or 720 minutes) for example: 

(a) If the time ofbirth is 5-30 AM (1ST) and local midnight 
is 0-15 (1ST) the difference is 5b30m-Ohl5'" 
= 5h]5'"= 315'". 
(b) If the time ofbirth is 2-30 PM (1ST) and local time 
mid-night is 0-15 (1ST) or 24-15 (IST) difference 
is 24h15'"-14h30'"= 91'45'"= 585'"as 2-30 PM is 
]4b30m. 
Step II-As the maximum strength is sixty shashtiamsa 

25 


gained I lost in 12X60 =nom so for finding out the strength 
of the planets strong at mid-day divide the difference by 
seven hundred and twenty and multiplying by sixty i.e. 
dividing by twelve we get the strength of Sun, Jupiter and 
Venus. 

i.e. in this example for case (a) 
315 x 60 + 720 = 315 + 12 = 26.25 shashtiamsas 

For case (b) 

585 x 60 + 720 = 585 + 12 = 48.75 shashtiamsas 

for the planets strong at mid-night i.e. Moon , Mars and 
Saturn deduct above results from sixty. 

t.e. for case (a) 
60.00-26.25 = 33.75 shashtiamsas 
for case (b) 

60.00-48.75 = 11.25 shatiamsas 

Now we apply it to the standard horos·cope for 
calculating the nathonnatha Bala. The birth time is I hour 
30 minutes = 90 minutes. 

The difference oftime of birth and the local mid-night 
= 90m -17m= 73'" 

Nathonnath Bala of Sun, Jupiter and Venus 
= 73 + 12 =6.I shashtiamsas. 

Nathonnath Bala-.o( Moon, Mars and Saturn 
.= 60-6.1 = 53.9 shashtiamsas 

Mercury is always powerful hence its Nathonnath Bala 

= 60 shashtiamsas. 

Though different methods are given at different places, 
the method explained above is the simplest in modern 
context. Therefore other methods for calculating the 

26 


BaJa have not been given to avoid confusion. 

(b) Paksha BaJa : 
This is the strength of the planets gained by the 
Paksha/fortnight in which the native was born. Ashubh 
(Malefic) planets are strong in Krishna Paksha i.e. dark 
halfwhen the Moon is waning. The shubha planets arc 
strong in Shukla Paksha i.e. when the Moon is waxing. Sun, 
Mars, Saturn and afflicted Mercury are Ashubhas (Malefics 
or Papas) while Jupiter, Venus and well associated Mercury 
are shubhas (Benefics). Moon is benefic from eighth day 
of bright half (shukla Paksha) to 8th day of dark half 
(Krishna Paksha). 

For calculation of PAKSHA BALA 

Find out the difference of longitudes of Moon and 
Sun. It should not be more than one hundred and eighty 
degrees, the formula becomes 

(Moon's longitude-Sun's longitude) x 60 + 180 
=(Moon's longitude-Sun's Longitude) + 3 
ifthe numerator is more than one hundred and eighty reverse 
the Moon and Sun i.e. (Sun's longitude-Moon's Longitude) 
divided by three will give the shashtiamsas of shubhas 
(Benefics). The Paksha Bala of Ashubhas (Malefics) will 

be obtained by deducting the Paksha Bala of Bcnefics from 
sixty. Moon's Paksha Bala will always be doubled. 
For the standard horoscope :(
Moon's longitude.:... Sun's longitude)+ 3 

(as the numerator is less than 180°) 
= (309.50-146.37) + 3 = 163.13 + 3 = 54.38 
Ben.efics i.e. Venus and Jupiter. 
Paksha BaJa = 54.38 Shashtiamsa each. 
Paksha Bala of Moon= 54.38 x 2 = 108.76 shashtiamsas 

27 


As Mercury is associated with Jupiter and Saturn but 
nearer to Jupiter it will be taken as benefic. Its Paksha Bala 
is 54.38. 
PakshaBala of Mars, Sun and Saturn 

=60-54.38 =5.62 shashtiamsas each. 

By the above it is concluded that the students should 
not confuse.themselves with the Paksha. When the Moon 
is increasing the Balas of Benefics and the Moon are 
increasing and of Malefics decreasing. 

When the Moon is decreasing the balas ofbenefics 
and Moon are decreasing and malefics increasing. The 
Paksha Bala depends on the longitudes of the Moon and 
the Sun. 

Substance of the above is as under:Find 
out 

(i) (Longitude of Moon-Sun) + 3 
or (Longitude of Sun-Moon)+ 3 
(The numerator should be less than 180°) 
It will give the Paksha Bala of Shubhas irrespective 
of Paksha whether it is Krishna or shukla. 

(ii) For malefics-Paksha Bala = 60-result of(i) 
(iii) For Moon -take it as Benefic and multiply the 
Bala by two. 
(c) Tribhag Bala : 
It is the strength obtained by the planets due to that 
part of day/ night in which the native was born. 
The day and night arc divided into three equal parts 
and for every part one planet gets sixty shashtiarnsas while 
Jupiter always gets sixty shahtiamsas and the rest get zero. 
The chart showing the planets to get sixty shashtiamsas is 

28 


given below : 
Day Night 
lst Part Mercury Moon 
lind Part Sun Venus 
Illrd Part Saturn Mars 

Jupiter always gets sixty shatiamsas. 

Method for calculation of Tribhaga BaJa :Find 
the time of Sun rise and sunset at the place of 
birth. Deducting Sunrise time from Sunset time (in Railway 
time) we get the duration of day. Dividing this by three we 
will get the length of each part of the day. By adding one 
p'art with Sun rise time the ending time oflst part is arrived 
at, which will be the beginning time ofthe II part. By addingthe duration of time of a part to it we will get the ending 
time of II part which is also the starting time of III partand it will end at Sun set. 
Find out the Ratriman i.e. duration of night= Twentyfour -duration of the day (Dinaman) and dividing it bythree we will get the duration of each part for night. As 
we have found out for the day we shall find the I, II and 
Ill parts of night by substituting Sunset for Sunrise and 
Sunrise for Sunset in the above. 
Now the Tribhaga Bala of the standard horoscope is 
calculated :


Sunrise = 6-05 AM 

Sunset = 6-29 PM = 18-29 PM 
Duration of day = J8h29m -6h05'" = I2h24m 

Duration of night = 24h -12h24'" = 1Jl'36'" 
As the. birth time is 1-30 AM i.e. night we are to find 
the Part of night. 

29 


So II h36m + 3 = 3h-52m is the duration of each part . 
of 'Ratriman' 

1st Part of night starts from time of Sunset ISh29m and 
adding one part i.e. 3h52mwe observe I part ends at 22hlJm. 

lind Part of night starts from 22h2J m and extends upto(22h2J m+3h52m;., 26h13m) 2h I3m (early morning of the next 
day) . ' 

III Part of night starts from 26hJ3m (or 2h13m AM) to 6h 
sm (time of Sunrise of next day) 

Therefore the native was born in II part ofnight. So Venus 
will get sixty shashtiamsas. 

STRENGTH: 
Venus and Jupiter would get sixty shashtiamsas each 
as tribhaga BaJa and the rest will get zero. 

(d) Abda BaJa : 
For Astrological purposes only the Indians considered 
a year of three hundred and sixty days and a month ofthirtydays. These years and months are neither related to 
movement of Sun nor that of Moon. They are not related 
, to luni-solar year also. 
The Abdadhipati i.e. lord of the first day of such 
an year of the birth ofNative will get fifteen shashtiamsa 
as Abda Bala and rest will get zero. 
'Ahargana' is the number of days passed upto anyparticular epoch. The number of days elapsed since the 
creation are known as Srishtyadi Ahargana. 
To count Srishtyadi ahargana upto a particular day 
is difficult. 
On the basis of the table I grven in the book Graha 
and Bhava Balas by Dr. B.V. Raman another table of 

30 


No. of days passed up to the date of birth = 11 023 

(as calculated in Abdabala) 

11023 ..,_ 30 = 367 13/ 30 
No. of days more than complete weeks in 367 months 

= 367 X 2 = 734 

N·o. of days more than complete weeks on the 1st day of 
month in which the native was born = 734 + 1 = 735 

Now 735 + 7 = 105 & remainder zero. 

So 1st day of the month of birth was Tuesday and 
its lord is Mars. Therefore, Mars gets thirty shatiarnsas as 
Masa BaJa and the rest of the planets get zero. 

(f) Vara BaJa : 
The number of days including 12th Sept. 1981 = 
11022 

NOTE: The time ofbirth of the native is 1-30 AM of 
13-9-1981. The Gregorian Calender date starts from midnight 
while the Indian day starts from sunrise and ends on 
the next Sun rise. Therefore, the date according to Indian 
system was 12-9-81 and not 13-9-81. So we have incl_uded 

.ihe 12th only not the 13th in the above data. 
Now calculation ofVara on the day ofbirth = 11022 

+ 7 = 1574 4/ 
7 i.e. four is the remainder after completion 
of I 574 weeks. Now count zero = Tuesday, One = 
Wednesday, Two = Thursday, Three = friday, Four = 
Saturday. Therefore, the day was Saturday and its lord was 
Saturn which will get fortyfive shashtiamsas and rest zero 
as Vara Bala. · 
(g) Hora BaJa : 
Hora is of One hour and starts from the Sunrise. In 
the present case Sunrise is 6-5 am IST and the time of 
birth is 1-30 am i.e. 25-30 1ST. 

32 


(h) Ayana BaJa : 
The strength of a planet being in the North or South 
of the Celestial'Equator is known as Ayana Bala. 

Ayana Bala depends upon d,eclination (Kranti) of a 
planet. The declination is the ang'ular distance of a planet 
from it to the foot ofthe perpendicular on celestial equator. 

If the planet is in the north of Equator the declination 
is North and word 'N' or (+) sign is written after the 
degrees of declination. If it is towards south the word 'S' 
or (-) sign is shown after the degrees of declination. 

Sun crosses the equator twice every year. Once going 
towards North from South and this point is known as 
Vernal equinox or spring equinox and second time going 
to South from North and this point is named 'Autumnal 
Equinox'. At these two Equinoctical points (spring equinox 
and Autumnal equinox) the declination of Sun is zero as it 
is on the equator and its distance from equator is zero. 
The declination is one of the pair (declination, Right 
ascension) which shows the position of a heavenly body 
with respect to vernal equinox and equator. 

The declination is always measured in respect of a 
Sayana Graha. Therefore, the sayana longitudes of 
a planets are to be determined by adding ayanamsa 
to the nirayana longitudes. 

The maximum declination ofSun is 24°(23°27') which 
is the inclination of ecliptic with the equator. For Ayana 
Bala we will take the maximum declination as 24° towards 
North and 24° towards south i.e. the total movement in 
declination will be 24 + 24 = 48°. 

Determination of declination from NirayanaLongitudes: 

(I) Convert the N irayana longitudes ofall the planets 
34 


declination should be deducted from twenty four i.e. their 
declination should be counted from the extreme southern 
end. It can also be implied that they get maximum Ayanabala, 
when they are at Northern end of their path afterwards they 
start moving down. Sun's Ayanabala is always doubled. 

For Saturn and Moon the southern declination is added 
to· twenty four and Northern declineation deducted from 
twentyfour which means that they get the maximum 
Ayanabala while at the southern. end of their path and zero 
when at the Northern end. 

For Mercury the declination whether Southern or 
Northern is always additive to twentyfour i.e. Mercury is 
strong in Ayanabala when at the southern/Northern ends 
and weak at the equator. 

The maximum Ayanabala is sixty shashtiamsas and the 
declination from Southern end to Northern end is 24 + 24 
= 48". 

·Jn 48" Ayanabala is raised from zero to sixty

sashtiamsa so in x· the Ayanabala will be X X 60 + 48 

i.e. the formula becomes 
Ayanabala = (24 ± declination) x 60/48 
the ± for addition or subtraction ofdeclination as per 
. rules given above. 

36 


CHAPTER 5 

MOTIONAL STRENGTH 
= CHESTABALA 

Chestabala is the strength due to retrogression ofa planet. 
The planets become retrograde when they are nearer to 
earth. (Refer to my book on Astronomy). The strength 
gained due to arc of retrogression is known as chestabala. 
Chestabala is maximum when the difference between the 
average of mean longitude and true longitude with 
sheeghrochcha is maximum i.e. when the planet is at a 
maximum distance from earth, it is Apogee or saysheeghrochcha. 

Earth moves round the sun or say Sun appears to move 
round the earth. As the longitudes used are geo-centric 
longitudes, the longitudes of Sun will be ever increasingand the Sun will not appear retrograde at any time. As 
Moon revolves around the earth, its longitudes will also 
be ever increasing and not decreasing at all i.e. the Moon 
will never be retrograde. 

The inferior planets retrograde when they are in 
between the Earth and the Sun as they are nearer to earth 
at that time. When they are nearest to the earth i.e. on 
perigee, they are nearly in the middle of their retrograde 
movement. They retrograde sometime before and sometime 
after the perigee. 


The superior planets are retrograde sometime before 
and sometime after the opposition. When they are in 
opposition, they are nearly in the middle of the retrograde 
motion. 

Longitudes : 
Mean longitudes are the longitudes which are obtained 
by considering the motion of a planet being uniform and 
in a circular path instead of an elliptical one. 

Epoch: 
The epoch is taken at the begiiming of 1st January 
1900 mid-night at 76°(E) {The meridian ·of Ujjainconsidered as meridian of India by the Indian 
Astronomers.} 
As inner planets (Mercury and Venus) remain nearer 
to Sun, their mean longitudes will be taken as that of Sun. 
It has been pointed out earlier that the superior planets 
(Mars, .Jupiter and Saturn) will be in the middle of their 
retrograde motion when they are nearest to earth and in 
opposition with the Sun. 
They will be farthest to earth when they are in 

conjunction with the Sun. So fheir sheeghrochcha will be 
the same as mean longitude of the Sun. 
. For finding out the mean longitudes of Sun, Mars, 

Jupiter and Saturn and seeghrochcha ofMercury and Venus 
the tables from IV and IX will be used as shown below : 

Calculation : 
First find out the number of days elapsed from the 
epoch to the time ofbirth. For the standard horoscope from 

the mid-night (ofUjjain) ofist January 1900 to 1.30 AM 
(IST) on 13th September, 1981. 
198 1-1 900 = 8 1 years (as the base year is I900 and 

not I90 I) 

43 


No of days in 81 yrs = 81 x 365 = 29565 days 

Addit.ional days for leap year = 20 days 

No. ofdays from 1-1-81 to 12-9-81 = 255 days 

·No. ofdays from 12 mid-night of 

Ujjain to 1.30 1ST* = 0.04 days 

Total no. of days = 29840.04 days 

• { 1.30 IST = 1h.30'-Oh.26' (LMT correction for Ujjain) 
= 1h.04' = 0.04 days} 
As stated earlier Mean longitude of Sun = Mean 
longitude of Mercury = Mean longitude of Venus = 
Seeghrochcha of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn 

So the Mean loongitudes of Sun, Mars, Jupiter ,
Saturn and Seeghrochca of Mercury and Venus are to be 
found out as under for the standard horoscope. 

Calculation of Mean longitude of Sun : 
From Table IV 
For 20,000 days = 272.0531 
9000 days = 230.4239 
800 days = 68.4821 
40 days = 39.4240 (10 x 4 units value) 

0.04 days = 0.04 ( 0.04 x 0.98 i.e. 0.04x1) 
Total 610.4231 
Constant at epoch= 257.4568 
867.8799 =867°.88(I'ounded) 
deduct multiples of 360 and get 
867.88-720 = 147°.88 which is mean longitude of 

Sun. 
Calculations of Mean longitudes of Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn and Seeghrochcha of Mercury and Venus from 

44 


CHAPTER 7 

ASPECT STRENGTH 
OR DRIK BALA 

Aspectual strength is the strength of Planets gained due 
to aspect of other planets on it. 

Drishti or Aspect : 
The aspected planet is always taken ahead and 
aspecting one behind i.e. for calculation of Drishti Kendra 
or Aspect angle the longitudes of aspecting planets are 
subtracted from the aspected planets. 
Normally the planets aspect the other planets most 
powerfully at the position 180 degree away from it. But 
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn (outer planet) have special aspect 
or vishesha Drishti i.e. Mars aspects the fourth and eighth 
house with full Drishti while Saturn aspects the third and 
tenth house with full Drishti and Jupiter aspects the fifth 
and ninth house from it with full Drishti. 

Drishti Kendra or Aspect Angle: 
Drishti Kendra or Aspect Angle is obtained bysubtracting the longitudes of Aspecting planet from the 
Aspected planet. 
(Table follows on the following page) 


30° to 60°. So there is an increase of 1 point for 
every 2°. 

(3) Increase from 15 points to 45 points is from 60° 
to 90° the increase is of 30 points in 30°. In other 
words for every degree the increase is I point. 
(4) From 90° to 120° there is a decrease of 15 points(decrease of 15 points in ,30°) i.e. for every two 
degrees there is a decrease of I point. 
(5) From 120° to 150° (in 30°) there is decereasc 
of30 points (30pts. to Opt.). So for every degree, 
the decrease is of 1 point. 
(6) From 150° to 180° (in 30°), the increase is zero 
pt. to 60pts. (60 points), so for every degree, the 
increase of 2 points. 
(7) From 180° to 300° (in 120°) the decrease is from 
60 pcints to 0 points (60 points) i.e. for everytwo degrees the decrease is of one point. 
By using the figure (II method) we can calculate the 
aspect value very easily. Before proceeding to actual 
calculations, the special aspect may be considered fir.st. 

(a) The special aspect of Mars arc of IV house and VIII 
house i.e. when the aspect angle from Mars is 90° 
to 120° and 210° to 240° and value of this special 
Drishti is 15 Shasht iamsas or points. The reason for 
these 15 points has not been given anywhere (to my 
knowledge). But it is not without rule and in my view 
the rule is the IV house starts from 90° and VIII starts 
from 210° the aspect value is 45 shashtiamsas at 
these aspect angles. To make it a full drishti an 
addition of 60 -45 15 shashtiamsas is to be done. 
(b) The special aspect ofjupitcr is on V and IX houses. 
When it is 120° to 150° or 240° to 270° behind the 
aspcctcd body and it is full = 60 shasht iamsas. The 
51 


aspect value at 120° and 240° behind is 30 pts and 
to make it a full Drishti add 60 -30 = 30 points 
. (shashtiamsas). 

(c) The special aspect of saturn is on Illrd and Xth 
houses i.e. from 60° to 90° and 270° to· 300° of 
aspect angle. The aspect value at 60° and 270° of 
aspect angle is 15 points. To get full Drishti value an 
addition of 60 -15 = 45 points/shashtiamsas is to 
be done. 
So the addition for special aspects are summarized as 

follows:Aspect 
angle Add in 
shashtiamsas 
(i) Mars 90° to 120J 
210° to 240° 
15 
(ii) Jupiter 120°to 150J 
240° to 270° 
30 
(iii) Saturn 60° to 90J 
270° to 300° 
45 

Subha grahas will have benefic Drishti to be denoted 1 
by ( +) sign and Ashubhas will have Malefic Drishti to be 
shown as (-) sign. 

The Jupiter, Venus, Waxing Moon (7th to 8th) and 
well are shubhas while Sun, Mars, 
Saturn, Waning Moon (8 ofKrishna Paksha to 7th ofShukla 
Paksha) and badly associated Mercury are Ashubhas. 

Drishti Pinda : 
The total Aspect value of all the planets considering 
positive for shubhas and negative for Ashubhas, the Drishti 
Pinda will be arrived at. 

52 


CHAPTER 8 

HOUSE STRENGTH OR 
BHAVA BALA 

Each Bhava has been assinged certain events or function. 
The first house is known as Tanu ·Bhava. It represents the 
body of the individual including complexion etc. The II 
Bhava represents Wealth, Family etc. If a bhava is strong, 
the native will enjoy the indications of the Bhava fully. If 
the bhava is week, the native will not be in a position to 
enjoy the significations of the bhava. 

The strength of a Bhava is determined by : 

(i) Bhavadhipati Bala ic the strength of the lord of 
the bhava. 
(ii) Bhava Digbala. 
(iii) Bhava aspect strength or say Bhava Drishti Bala. 
(1) Bhavadhipati Bala : 
It is the strength of the bhava or the lord of the Rashi 
in which Bhava Madhya falls. These have been calculated 
in previous chapters. 

(2) Bhava Digbala : 
It is the strength obtained by the various Bhavas due 

to their Bhava Madhya being in different Rashis. The entire 
zodiac has been classified into four types of Rashis namely: 

(a) Nara rashis (Human signs) are represented by 
,Mithuna (Gemini), Kanya (Virgo), Tula (Libra), 
first half of Dhanu (Sagittarius) and Kumbha 
(Aquarius). If the Madhya of ascendant falls in 
Nara Rashi, the I house acquire a strength of 60 
shashtiamsas (one Rupa) and it gradually loses 
strength@ I 0 shashtiamsas per Bhava (whether 
clock wise or anticlock wise) till it is reduced 
to 0 in the VII Bhava. If the Bhava Madhya of 
VII is in a Nara Rashi it will have digbala as zero. 
In other words: 

Bhava Madhya of I house = 60 shashtiamsas 

if in Nara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya of II/XII = 50 -do


house if in Nara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya of III/XI = 40 -do


house if in Nara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya of IV/X = 30 -do


house if in N ara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya ofV/IX = 20 -do


house if in Nara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya ofVINIII = 10 -do


house if in Nara Rashi 

Bhava Madhya of VII house = 0 -doif 
in N ara Rash i 

(b) Jalachara Rashis:-Watery or aquatic Rashis 
are known as Jalachara Rashis. they are Karkata 
(cancer), second half of Makar (Capricorn), and 
Meena (Pices). If the Bhava Madhya of fourth 
57 


house falls in tliese Rashi, it will get 60. 
shashtiamsas and in X it will get 0 shashtiamsas. 
the digbala is reduced as such Rashis are away 
from IV Bhava like the pr,evious example ofNara 
Rash is. 

(c) Chatushpada Rashis or Quadruped Rashis:These 
are Mesha (Aries), Vrishabha (Taurus), 
Sinha (Leo), second half of Dhanu· (Sagittarius) 
and 1st half of Makar (Capricorn). If the Xth 
Bhava Madhya falls in these it will get 60 
shashtiamsas. The strength is reduced as it goesaway from Xth Bhava reaches near to IV Bhava. 
(d) Keeta Rashis or insect sign :-There is onlyone Rashi namely Vrischika (Scorpio) which is 
Keeta Rashi. When it is in the VII Bhava 
Madhya, the VII bhava acquires a strength of60 
shashtiamsas and if I Bhava Madhya falls in it,
the I Bhava will have zero digbala. The digbalas 
ofthe Bhavas whose Bhava Madhya falls in Keeta 
Rashis goes on increasing by I 0 shashtiamsas per 
house as it is away from I house. 
(3) Bhava Drishtibala or Bhava's Aspect strength: 
A Bhava gets certain strength by the aspect of the 
planets on its Bhava Madhya. The Drishti Bala on the 
various Bhavas is measured as was done for the Drishti 
Bala of the Planets in chapter VII with the following 
changes:


(a) Mercury is always benefic for Bhava Drishti Bala 
Irrespective of its association. 
(b) The Drishti BaJa's of Mercury and Jupiterincluding special aspect are taken as obtained · 
(full). While that of other planets (including their 
special aspect) are divided by 4 i.e. only one58 



is essential for calculating their lshta Phala and Kashta 
Ph ala. 

Sun's Chesta BaJa : 
Add ninty degrees to the Sayana longitude ofthe sun 
and if it is more than 180° deduct it from 360°. After that 
divide by 3. 

In the case of standard horoscope : 
Sun's Nirayana Longitude = 146°.37 

Ayanamsa = +23°.60 

Sun's Sayana Longitude = 169°.97 
= +90° 
= 259°.97 

as it is more than 180° deduct from 360° 
J60°-259°.97 = 100°.03 
Chesta bala of Sun = 100.03 = 33.34 

3 

Chesta bala of Moon : 
Deduct the longitiude of Sun from that ofMoon and 
divide by three ifless than 180°, otherwise divide by three 
after deducting it from 360° 

In the case of Standard Horoscope : 
Moon's Longitude = 309.50 
Sun's Longitude = -146.37 

163.13 

which is less than 180° so no necessity of deducting it from 
360°. 
Moon's Chesta Bala = 163.13 = 54.38 
3 
= Paksha Bala of Benefics. 

63 


SUMMARY 

Shadbala : Six -fold strength consists of: 

1. Positional Strength 2. Directional Strength 
3. Temporal strength 4. Motional Strength 
5. Natural Strength 6. Aspect Strength 
t. Positional Strength or Sthana Bala : 
It consists of five balas : 
(i) Uchchabala : It is obtained by dividing the 
difference of longitudes between the planet and the 
debilitation point by 3. In ifX and Dare the longitudes 
of planet and debilitation point, it is= X-D/3 or D-X/3where the numerator should be less than 180°. 
(ii) Saptvargiya bala : It is obtained by a planetaccording to its relation with the lord of the rashi where it 
is posited in the seven divisional charts : 
1. Rashi, 2. Hora, 3. Drekkana, 4. Saptmansha, 
5. Navamsha, 6. Dwadsamsha, 7. Trimsamsha 
Prepare the Panchdha Maitri chaka and allot the strength 
in Sashtiamsha as given below: Mooltrikona sign 45, Own 
sign 30, Fast Friend's Sign 22.5, Friend's Sign 15, Neutral's 
sign 7.5, Enemy's sign 3.75 and Bitter enemy's sign 1.875. 

(iii) Yugma Yugma Bala or Ojayugma Bala : Moon 
and Venus get I 5 shashtiamsa bala for each if they are 
posited in even sign and even navamsha otherwise zero. 
The rest i.e. Sun, Mars. Mercury, Jupiter anrl saturn get 
15 shashtiamsa·bala for each in odd rashi and odd navamsha 
otherwise zero. 
(iv) Kendra Bala :The planets which are psoited in 
kendra get 60, in Panphara 30 and in Apoklima 15 
shashtimsa bala. 
71 


Mercury. Malefics are Sun, Mars, saturn andaffiicted 
Mercury. 

Longitude of Moon -Longitude of Sun 
Paksha Bala ofbenefics "'-----------


3 
in case numerator is more than 180° reverse the 
position of the Moon and the Sun. 

For malefics Paksha Bala = 60-Paksha bala of shubha 

For Moon Paksha Bala = 2 x Paksha: BaJa of shubhas 

.(iii) Tribhag Bala : 

Day and night each is divided into three parts. The 
lord of the part of the day or night in which the native was 
born gets 60 shashtiamsa bala. Jupiter always gets 60 
shashtiamsa bala. Rest of the planets get o_bala. 

(iv) Abda bala : 
The lord of the frrst day of the year (reckoned 360 
days per year from shristiyadi) gets 15 shashtiamsa bala 
and other zero. 

(v) Masa Bala : 
The lord of the frrst day of the month (reckoned 30 
days per month from shristiyadi ) gest 30 shashtiamsa baia' 
and rest zero. 

(vi) Vara bala : 
The lord of the week-day ofbirth gets 45 shashtiamsa 
bala and rest zero. 

(vii) Hora Bala: 
Lord of the Hora of birth time gets 60 shashtiamsa 
bala and others zero. 

73 


(viii)Ayana Bala : 

. Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Venus are strong when their 
declination is 24° (N) and weak on 24° (S) declination. 
It is reversed in case of Moon and Saturn. While Mercury 
is strong at declineation 24°(N) and 24°(S). 

Ayan bala for Sun, Mars; Jupiter and Venus in shashtiamsa 
= (24+ North dec lineation or (-) south declineation) x 60 

+ 48 

Ayan bala for Moon and Saturn in shashtiamsa.;, (24+
Southern declineation or (-) Northern dec lineation) x 60 

+ 48 

Ayan bala for Mercury in shashtiamsa = (24 + declineation 
whether North or south) x 60 + 48 
Ayan bala of Sun is always doubled. 
(iX) Yudha ha"La:· 

In case the difference of longitudes between two 
planets (excluding Sun and Moon) is less than 1°, they are 
at war. 

Yudha Bala =The difference oftheir strength upto Hora bala 

difference ofdiameter of their discs 

It is added to winner's strength and c:teducted from 
the loser. 

The Sum of these nine balas is kala bala. 

4. Motional strength (chesta bala) : 
It is the strength gained by a planet due to retrogration. 

Chesta kendra = [(M. long.+ T. long.)+ 2] 

if numerator is more than 180°, deduct it from 360°. 

74 


